Fate and stupidity—and I’ll cover them both.

I was an Air Force pilot in the 1970s and I was going to be eligible to leave in October of 1979. All predictions were that the airlines were set for unprecedented growth in the 1980s. I figured I was perfectly positioned for a stellar career.

FIVE YEARS OF PLANNING

So I spent the last half of the 1970s updating my resumes at all but three of the major airlines. Because I researched the hell out of them, I had scratched three off my list: Pan Am, TWA, and Eastern.

Some friends thought that was stupid because I should apply to every airline. But no. For several years I told my friends that when it comes time to get out of the Air Force if those three were the only ones hiring, I’d just make a career in the Air Force. I didn’t see those three lasting long.

DEREGULATION IN 1978

Finally, 1979 dawned and I was getting excited, and especially so because the airlines had just been deregulated. I was an idiot pilot who knew nothing about business and so I assumed that deregulation meant I would make captain much faster than I had been thinking—and I had been thinking it would be fast already due to all the WW2 pilots retiring in the 1980s.

I was really excited.

But my dumb pilot brain failed to understand that the purpose of deregulation was not to help the established airlines grow. The purpose was to enable a massive number of start-up airlines to open up, thus breaking the hold the unions had on the long-established, legacy carriers and their high pay scales.

I had no clue and so I pressed on into 1979.

THE HINTS WERE SCREAMING: “THE WORLD IS CHANGING”

All through the year, the Universe was lining up to scream at me to NOT go be an airline pilot. But, hell, I was 29 years old and I knew everything. Further, I’d been planning for this year for 10 years. I would not be deterred.

One by one the various airlines stopped hiring. I was confused because with deregulation, they should have been ramping up their hiring. I had no idea that the major airline managements were planning to use deregulation to break their unions, cut their pay, cut their benefits, and wipe out their very rich pilot retirement funds.

But, dumb pilot that I was—confusing himself for a smart young dude pilot—I kept pressing on into 1979.

From the other side, the Air Force side, I had these ancient old fossil pilots telling me I should stay in the Air Force. But, damn, they were like 40 years old—ancient, dumb, old men. How could anyone that old have a clue about what I should do?

THE STUPIDITY OF IGNORING BRILLIANT ADVICE

While the airlines were closing their hiring programs, the Air Force was doing its very best to keep me in. I had been lucky enough to get assigned to fly in the Presidential Wing at Andrews Air Force Base and I had done well. And I had met a lot of high-level people.

One was the Air Force Chief of State, General Lew Allen. He had just been the commander of Systems Command, which owned Edwards Air Force Base, you know, the one where the test pilots train.

One day he invited me to fly him to Edwards and stay for a few days to look around. While sitting in the cockpit as I let him fly, he personally offered me a slot to test pilot school. He said that with the coming space shuttle, NASA was looking beyond fighter pilots for astronauts and wanted pilots with crew experience. He offered to sponsor me as one of the Air Force astronaut candidates if I went to test pilot school.

But, oh, holy shit, he was really old, he was 52. He had no idea how smart I was being a bullet-proof 29-year-old, genius hot shot who was going to be an airline pilot and make massive amounts of money. Test pilot school? Duhhhh! I was too smart to fall for that trick.

After I turned down that incredible offer—the incredibleness of which I would not realize until the shuttles began flying regularly—we got a new commander of the 89th at Andrews, General Gardiner. This guy’s job included being the commander of the Air Force One crew, the plane itself, etc. He wanted to check out in the jet I flew and as the chief pilot I personally gave him his checkout—as I had done for General Allen the year prior.

General Gardiner and I also got along really well and he offered me Air Force Two if I’d stay in.

The airlines were continuing to fall, one by one, but I was too smart to be lured by the lame advice of these ancient generals. So I declined Air Force Two. Duhhhh.

By October 1979, only one airline in the country was still hiring: Eastern.

I had never applied to them, even though I’d had applications on file for five years with every other airline except them, TWA, and Pan Am.

And then a friend got hired by Eastern. I felt sorry for him.

But he came back from his interview gushing about how great they were. I figured, what the hell, I could apply and at least get a practice interview for when I got an offer from a real airline.

TOTALLY SURPRISED

From my first minute of involvement with Eastern, they were wonderful. The people were fabulous and everyone was excited about the coming growth. I was hired within a month of sending in my application and—since it was the only game in the country at the time—I said yes.

Who was that guy who said he’d stay in the Air Force if Eastern, TWA, or Pan Am were the only airlines hiring?

But Eastern was, indeed, a really, really fun airline. Other airlines, especially Delta and United, were not fun. They were very serious. Our atmosphere was kind of like what I see today at Southwest—just fun to work for.

But, of course, its financial status was exactly as I had researched: It was a freaking house of cards and those cards were blowing away.

It turns out that the airline industry is a nasty, cutthroat business and there’s no room for fun airlines. I don’t know how you explain that to Southwest people who are still having fun at the only airline to never go bankrupt! But other than Southwest, the fun airlines went broke and the non-fun, serious ones like Delta, United, and American all survived. Go figure!

DESPITE FATE AND STUPIDITY: NO REGRETS

I was lucky to get hired by Eastern and have it go out of business so soon because I did not enjoy the life of an airline pilot. It’s not mentally challenging and I came to hate being sentenced to 12–14 days a month in the prison of a hotel room. I was happy to leave that industry and I have never for one second wished I had been a career airline pilot.

I would, however, have loved a career in the Air Force, especially had I accepted the Air Force Two slot. That super-smart 29-year-old me had no freaking idea how stupid he was and how smart Air Force generals are when they give you good advice.

But it worked out well because my experience with Eastern taught me to never again work for someone else.

Eastern had been the largest airline in the world the two years before it went out of business. I figured if they could disappear, all the others were in for bankruptcy as well. And they were.

And so, in two months I mark the 30th anniversary of working for myself in my own businesses and I have never once laid myself off.

And I never, ever see Air Force One or Air Force Two on TV and wish I had flown them. Never. Ever.

