I “would really like to” drink some Johnny Walker Blue Label to toast watching the premier episode of my TV series.

I REALLY WANT TO LIVE A MORE CREATIVE LIFE

I’ve written more than 100 books and sold more than 10 million copies. My literary agent has also written and sold large numbers of books. But all of our books have been non-fiction. After writing a lot of them, we both came to realize that non-fiction books are actually non-creative books. So, my agent wrote his first fiction book, which is published and is for sale on Amazon.

The instant I finished reading it, I realized that he’d created what the TV industry calls an episodic engine. He has created a fascinating world and storyline that includes a perfect setup for a series of shows that could run for years.

And so, we worked together to flesh out the development of the series.

We created the entire cast of characters, complete with biographies and backgrounds and hobbies and interests and quirks for each one. We created a detailed outline of the government agency around which the stories would unfold. We created and outlined the entire world in which the characters would live and die. Then I wrote the second episode.

WORKING ON THE NEXT STEPS

And then we assembled all of the information into a Web site so it would be easy to show potential producers. And now we’re calling on a lifetime of contacts to try to find a path to production.

I’ve had an incredible life for which I’m very grateful. I got to fly six U.S. Presidents and meet First Ladies and First Family kids. I’ve met lots of Senators and Reps, and Cabinet members, and foreign VIPs.

And after I stopped flying for a living I was able to craft an entrepreneurial life doing what I wanted. I’ve traveled to 49 states and all but two continents. I’ve been blessed with great kids and with wonderful grandkids. It’s been a lot of fun.

AND NOW: IT’S TIME TO BE CREATIVE

But now I would love for my real legacy to be all the episodes to the TV series that my agent and I will cowrite.

Because now it’s time to stop non-creative writing and produce some captivating creative stories out of the ether of the Universe.

No one needs our stories. No one but us will really care if they never get produced—but that’s exactly the point. That fact is what would make production so satisfying.

Way, way back when I first started flying famous people at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington, D.C. I felt I had risen to the pinnacle. But after just a few flights, reality hit me. Those people were going to fly on those trips with or without me. If I’d never chosen to become an Air Force pilot, someone else would have been in those cockpits at the exact same time I was.

Those flights were going with or without me because I was a cog in a big machine and the machine just needed some plug-and-play people. And I was the plug-in at the particular time.

And that’s what will make the sale and production of creative writing so deeply satisfying. It’s something no one else will do unless I do it. My literary agent is also a pilot, so I’ll continue the aviation metaphor—this project won’t take off unless my agent and I fly it.

Watching the premier of Episode 1: Season 1 would be a very deep joy and is something I’d really like to have happen in my life.

YOU CAN BE FEATURED IN AN EPISODE

I’m not kidding about that!

My agent’s dad was also a literary agent. Many years ago, he wrote a series of New York Times #1 bestsellers because he let his readers define the sequels to the original. This is detailed on the home page of the series’ Web site.

We’re going to take that idea to the next level using social media by letting viewers nominate themselves or friends or family as candidates for future episodes.

So, here’s your chance to be on TV! If you know a TV producer, please let them know about our series. If we get this thing on the air, I promise I will personally write the episode that features you as a character! Of course your producer friend has to be a good enough friend to agree to produce that episode—but I have no doubt that your life is supremely interesting and you’re the perfect candidate for an episode of your own!