Interesting question that I did not understand until I read your profile, where I learned that you are a synesthete. I didn’t know what that is, so I researched it.

Now that I know—and I am one myself—your question makes sense to me.

Now that I understand you a bit more I understand that you could fly over a place and the sight of it could conjure up other images or feelings that make you uncomfortable.

Without that happening, there is no reason for any particular location or route to be a “least favourite” (or even a least favorite, as us Yank call it) unless synesthesia is involved. So, I’m going to guess that many pilots who read this will not have a clue what you mean.

NO PARTICULAR ROUTE OR LOCATION

My answer to your specific question, as written, is a simple: No.

But had you written a similar query a bit differently—As a pilot, have you had an experience while flying that brought up weird or frightening feelings for you but were not related to an emergency? (In other words, everything was fine, but you had a particular reaction to something in flight even though it was not a hazard to your plane or your life?)

That needs a lot of tweaking, but I think you get the point. And, if that’s what you had asked I would have two specific answers.

SAINT ELMO’S FIRE

Saint Elmo’s fire is absolutely harmless, yet it frightened ancient sailors when it danced on their rigging on dark and stormy nights. That makes perfect sense because they were in the middle of a dark and stormy ocean in a frail ship in which they could all easily die—and many sailors did.

But there is no logical reason for an educated pilot today to have any weird feelings about it.

And yet, I did.

The first time I saw strange blue fingers of Saint Elmo’s fire dance around the frame of the windshield and the windshield wipers on my jet, it gave me the creeps. I felt something deep and larger than myself. It was as if the collective consciousness of frightened sailors welled up within me.

I saw it many times over the years and never got to the point at which I could be comfortable with it.

THE AURORA BOREALIS

On the ground, the aurora borealis is beautiful and cool to see. But the first and only time I saw it from the cockpit of a jet, it freaked me out. Nearly full fright erupted within me, all the symptoms, heart racing, I felt I could barely breathe. It was Saint Elmo’s fire on a massive scale. I felt that some ancient energy was waiting up head in the sky to snatch me right out of my life when we got there.

On the ground, there is no way it’s going to get me because it’s up there in the sky. But when I was up there in the sky with it, I felt like I was an intruder who didn’t belong and it was angry that I was encroaching on its realm. In other words, it felt like a living thing that was warning me to respect its space.

Of course the auroras pose no danger to a jet because it is impossible for us to fly into it. But that didn't stop the feeling that those dancing fingers were going to get me when I got to them.

Now that I’ve written all of that, I realize that my answer does fit your OP:

I don’t like flying a northern route at a time when the aurora borealis is visible.